# Foreword by John H. Conway

*How to Solve It* is a wonderful book! This I realized when I first read right through it as a student many years ago, but it has taken me a long time to appreciate just *how* wonderful it is. Why is that? One part of the answer is that the book is unique. In all my years as a student and teacher, I have never seen another that lives up to George Polya's title by teaching you how to go about solving problems. A. H. Schoenfeld correctly described its importance in his 1987 article "Polya, Problem Solving, and Education" in *Mathematics Magazine:* "For mathematics education and the world of problem solving it marked a line of demarcation between two eras, problem solving before and after Polya."

It is one of the most successful mathematics books ever written, having sold over a million copies and been translated into seventeen languages since it first appeared in 1945. Polya later wrote two more books about the art of doing mathematics, *Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning* (1954) and *Mathematical Discovery* (two volumes, 1962 and 1965).

The book's title makes it seem that it is directed only toward students, but in fact it is addressed just as much to their teachers. Indeed, as Polya remarks in his introduction, the first part of the book takes the teacher's viewpoint more often than the student's.

Everybody gains that way. The student who reads the book on his own will find that overhearing Polya's comments to his non-existent teacher can bring that desirable person into being, as an imaginary but very helpful figure leaning over one's shoulder. This is what happened to me, and naturally I made heavy use of the remarks I'd found most important when I myself started teaching a few years later.

But it was some time before I read the book again, and when I did, I suddenly realized that it was even more valuable than I'd thought! Many of Polya's remarks that hadn't helped me as a student now made me a better teacher of those whose problems had differed from mine. Polya had met many more students than I had, and had obviously thought very hard about how to best help all of them learn mathematics. Perhaps his most important point is that learning must be active. As he said in a lecture on teaching, "Mathematics, you see, is not a spectator sport. To understand mathematics means to be able to do mathematics. And what does it mean **to be** doing mathematics? In the first place, it means to be able to solve mathematical problems."

It is often said that to teach any subject well, one has to understand it "at least as well as one's students do." It is a paradoxical truth that to teach mathematics well, one must also know how to misunderstand it at least to the extent one's students do! If a teacher's statement can be parsed in two or more ways, it goes without saying that some students will understand it one way and others another, with results that can vary from the hilarious to the tragic.

J. E. Littlewood gives two amusing examples of assumptions that can easily be made unconsciously and misleadingly. First, he remarks that the description of the coordinate axes ($Ox$ and $Oy$ as in 2 dimensions, $Oz$ vertical) in Lamb's book *Mechanics* is incorrect for him, since he always worked in an armchair with his feet up! Then, after asking how his reader would present the picture of a closed curve lying all on one side of its tangent, he states that there are four main schools (to left or right of vertical tangent, or above or below horizontal one) and that by lecturing without a figure, presuming that the curve was to the right of its vertical tangent, he had unwittingly made nonsense for the other three schools.

I know of no better remedy for such presumptions than Polya's counsel: before trying to solve a problem, the student should demonstrate his or her understanding of its statement, preferably to a real teacher, but in lieu of that, to an imagined one. Experienced mathematicians know that often the hardest part of researching a problem is understanding precisely what that problem says. They often follow Polya's wise advice: "If you can't solve a problem, then there is an easier problem you can't solve: find it."

Readers who learn from this book will also want to learn about its author's life.[^1]

George Polya was born György Pólya (he dropped the accents sometime later) on December 13, 1887, in Budapest, Hungary, to Jakab Pólya and his wife, the former Anna Deutsch. He was baptized into the Roman Catholic faith, to which Jakab, Anna, and their three previous children, Jenő, Ilona, and Flóra, had converted from Judaism in the previous year. Their fifth child, László, was born four years later.

Jakab had changed his surname from Pollák to the more Hungarian-sounding Pólya five years before György was born, believing that this might help him obtain a university post, which he eventually did, but only shortly before his untimely death in 1897.

At the Dániel Berzsenyi Gymnasium, György studied Greek, Latin, and German, in addition to Hungarian. It is surprising to learn that there he was seemingly uninterested in mathematics, his work in geometry deemed merely "satisfactory" compared with his "outstanding" performance in literature, geography, and other subjects. His favorite subject, outside of literature, was biology.

He enrolled at the University of Budapest in 1905, initially studying law, which he soon dropped because he found it too boring. He then obtained the certification needed to teach Latin and Hungarian at a gymnasium, a certification that he never used but of which he remained proud. Eventually his professor, Bernát Alexander, advised him that to help his studies in philosophy, he should take some mathematics and physics courses. This was how he came to mathematics. Later, he joked that he "wasn't good enough for physics, and was too good for philosophy — mathematics is in between."

In Budapest he was taught physics by Eötvös and mathematics by Fejér and was awarded a doctorate after spending the academic year 1910–11 in Vienna, where he took some courses by Wirtinger and Mertens. He spent much of the next two years in Göttingen, where he met many more mathematicians — Klein, Caratheodory, Hilbert, Runge, Landau, Weyl, Hecke, Courant, and Toeplitz — and in 1914 visited Paris, where he became acquainted with Picard and Hadamard and learned that Hurwitz had arranged an appointment for him in Zürich. He accepted this position, writing later: "I went to Zürich in order to be near Hurwitz, and we were in close touch for about six years, from my arrival in Zürich in 1914 to his passing in 1919. I was very much impressed by him and edited his works."

Of course, the First World War took place during this period. It initially had little effect on Polya, who had been declared unfit for service in the Hungarian army as the result of a soccer wound. But later when the army, more desperately needing recruits, demanded that he return to fight for his country, his strong pacifist views led him to refuse. As a consequence, he was unable to visit Hungary for many years, and in fact did not do so until 1967, fifty-four years after he left.

In the meantime, he had taken Swiss citizenship and married a Swiss girl, Stella Vera Weber, in 1918. Between 1918 and 1919, he published papers on a wide range of mathematical subjects, such as series, number theory, combinatorics, voting systems, astronomy, and probability. He was made an extraordinary professor at the Zürich ETH in 1920, and a few years later he and Gábor Szegő published their book *Aufgaben und Lehrsatze aus der Analysis* ("Problems and Theorems in Analysis"), described by G. L. Alexanderson and L. H. Lange in their obituary of Polya as "a mathematical masterpiece that assured their reputations."

That book appeared in 1925, after Polya had obtained a Rockefeller Fellowship to work in England, where he collaborated with Hardy and Littlewood on what later became their book *Inequalities* (Cambridge University Press, 1936). He used a second Rockefeller Fellowship to visit Princeton University in 1933, and while in the United States was invited by H. F. Blichfeldt to visit Stanford University, which he greatly enjoyed, and which ultimately became his home. Polya held a professorship at Stanford from 1943 until his retirement in 1953, and it was there, in 1978, that he taught his last course, in combinatorics; he died on September 7, 1985, at the age of ninety-seven.

Some readers will want to know about Polya's many contributions to mathematics. Most of them relate to analysis and are too technical to be understood by non-experts, but a few are worth mentioning.

In probability theory, Polya is responsible for the now-standard term "Central Limit Theorem" and for proving that the Fourier transform of a probability measure is a characteristic function and that a random walk on the integer lattice closes with probability $1$ if and only if the dimension is at most $2$.

In geometry, Polya independently re-enumerated the seventeen plane crystallographic groups (their first enumeration, by E. S. Fedorov, having been forgotten) and together with P. Niggli devised a notation for them.

In combinatorics, Polya's Enumeration Theorem is now a standard way of counting configurations according to their symmetry. It has been described by R. C. Read as "a remarkable theorem in a remarkable paper, and a landmark in the history of combinatorial analysis."

*How to Solve It* was written in German during Polya's time in Zürich, which ended in 1940, when the European situation forced him to leave for the United States. Despite the book's eventual success, four publishers rejected the English version before Princeton University Press brought it out in 1945. In their hands, *How to Solve It* rapidly became — and continues to be — one of the most successful mathematical books of all time.

[^1]: The following biographical information is taken from that given by J. J. O'Connor and E. F. Robertson in the MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive (www-gap.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/).
