# Our Goal

This book has a straightforward goal: to teach you how to engage with mathematics.

Let's unpack this. By "mathematics," I mean the universe of books, papers, talks, and blog posts that contain the meat of mathematics: formal definitions, theorems, proofs, conjectures, and algorithms. By "engage" I mean that for any mathematical topic, you have the cognitive tools to make progress toward understanding that topic. I will "teach" you by introducing you to—or having you revisit—a broad foundation of topics and techniques that support the rest of mathematics. I say "with" because mathematics requires active participation.

We will define and study many basic objects of mathematics, such as polynomials, graphs, and matrices. More importantly, I'll explain *how to think* about those objects as seasoned mathematicians do. We will examine the hierarchies of mathematical abstraction, along with many of the softer skills and insights that constitute "mathematical intuition." Along the way we'll hear the voices of mathematicians—both famous historical figures and my friends and colleagues—to paint a picture of mathematics as both a messy amalgam of competing ideas and preferences, and a story with delightfully surprising twists and connections. In the end, I will show you how mathematicians think about mathematics.

So why would someone like you[^1] want to engage with mathematics? Many software engineers, especially the sort who like to push the limits of what can be done with programs, eventually realize a deep truth: mathematics unlocks a *lot* of cool new programs. These are truly novel programs. They would simply be impossible to write (if not inconceivable!) without mathematics. That includes programs in this book about cryptography, data science, and art, but also to many revolutionary technologies in industry, such as signal processing, compression, ranking, optimization, and artificial intelligence. As importantly, a wealth of opportunity makes programming more fun! To quote Randall Munroe in his XKCD comic *Forgot Algebra*, "The only things you HAVE to know are how to make enough of a living to stay alive and how to get your taxes done. All the fun parts of life are optional." If you want your career to grow beyond shuffling data around to meet arbitrary business goals, you should learn the tools that enable you to write programs that captivate and delight you. Mathematics is one of those tools.

[^1]: Hopefully you're a programmer; otherwise, the title of this book must have surely caused a panic attack.

Programmers are in a privileged position to engage with mathematics. Your comfort with functions, logic, and protocols gives you an intuitive familiarity with basic topics such as boolean algebra, recursion, and abstraction. You can rely on this to make mathematics less foreign, progressing all the faster to more nuanced and stimulating topics. By contrast, most educational math content is for students with no background. Such content focuses on rote exercises and passing tests. This book will omit most of that. Programming also allows me to provide immediate applications that ground the abstract ideas in code. In each chapter, we'll fashion our mathematical designs into a program you couldn't have written before. All programs are written in Python 3. The code is available on Github,[^2] with a directory for each chapter.

[^2]: See [pimbook.org](https://pimbook.org).

All told, this book is not a textbook. I won't drill you with exercises, though drills have their place. We won't build up any particular field of mathematics from scratch. Though we'll visit calculus, linear algebra, and many other topics, this book is far too short to cover everything a mathematician ought to know about these topics. Moreover, while much of the book is appropriately rigorous, I will occasionally and judiciously loosen rigor when it facilitates a better understanding and relieves tedium. I will note when this occurs, and we'll discuss the role of rigor in mathematics more broadly.

Indeed, rather than read an encyclopedic reference, you want to become comfortable with the process of learning mathematics. In part that means becoming comfortable with discomfort, with the struggle of understanding a new concept, and the techniques that mathematicians use to remain productive and sane. Many people find calculus difficult, or squeaked by a linear algebra course without grokking it. After this book you should have a core nugget of understanding of these subjects, along with the cognitive tools that will enable you dive as deeply as you like.

As a necessary consequence, in this book you'll learn how to read and write proofs. The simplest and broadest truth about mathematics is that it revolves around proofs. Proofs are both the primary vehicle of insight and the fundamental measure of judgment. They are the law, the currency, and the fine art of mathematics. Most of what makes mathematics mysterious and opaque—the rigorous definitions, the notation, the overloading of terminology, the mountains of theory, and the unspoken obligations on the reader—is due to the centrality of proofs. A dominant obstacle to learning math is an unfamiliarity with this culture. In this book I'll cover the basic methods of proof, and each chapter will use proofs to build the subject matter. To be sure, you don't have to understand every proof to finish this book, and you will probably be confounded by a few. Embrace your humility. Each proof contains layers of insight that are genuinely worthwhile, but few gain a complete picture of a topic in a single sitting. As you grow into mathematics, the act of reading even previously understood proofs provides both renewed and increased wisdom. So long as you identify the value gained by your struggle, your time is well spent.

I'll also teach you how to read between the mathematical lines of a text, and understand the implicit directions and cultural cues that litter textbooks and papers. As we proceed through the chapters, we'll gradually become more terse, and you'll have many opportunities to practice parsing, interpreting, and understanding math. All of the topics in this book are explained by hundreds of other sources, and each chapter's exercises include explorations of concepts beyond these pages. Finally, I'll discuss how mathematicians approach problems, and how their process influences the culture of math.

You will not learn everything you want to know in this book, nor will you learn everything this book has to offer in one sitting. Those already familiar with math may find early chapters offensively slow and detailed. Those genuinely new to math may find the later chapters offensively fast. This is by design. I want you to be exposed to as much mathematics as possible. Learn the main definitions. See new notations, conventions, and attitudes. Take the opportunity to explore topics that pique your interest.

A number of readers have reached out to me to describe their struggles with proofs. They found it helpful to read a companion text on the side with extra guidance on sets, functions, and methods of proof—particularly for the additional exercises and consistently gradual pace. In this second edition, I added two appendices that may help with readers struggling with the pace. Appendix B contains more detail about the formalities underlying proofs, along with strategies for problem solving. Appendix C contains a list of books, and specifically a section for books on "Fundamentals and Foundations" that cover the basics of set theory, proofs, and problem solving strategies.

A number of topics are conspicuously missing from this book, my negligence of which approaches criminal. Except for a few informal cameos, we ignore complex numbers, probability and statistics, differential equations, and formal logic. In my humble opinion, none of these topics is as fundamental for mathematical computer science as those I've chosen to cover. After becoming comfortable with the topics in this book, for example, probability will be very accessible. Chapter 12 on eigenvalues includes a miniature introduction to differential equations. The notes for Chapter 16 on groups briefly summarizes complex numbers. Probability underlies our discussion of random graphs in Chapter 6 and machine learning in Chapter 14. Moreover, many topics in this book are prerequisites for these other areas. And, of course, as a single human self-publishing this book on nights and weekends, I have only so much time.

The first step on our journey is to confirm that mathematics has a culture worth becoming acquainted with. We'll do this with a comparative tour of the culture of software that we understand so well.
