# Live and Learn Linear Algebra (Again)

> Good mathematicians see analogies between theorems or theories. The very best ones see analogies between analogies.
>
> – Stephen Banach

During my PhD studies, my thesis advisor Lev and I would occasionally talk about teaching. Among others, he taught algorithms and I taught calculus and intro Python. One algorithms topic he covered was the Fast Fourier Transform.

For those who don't know (and apropos to an essay between two linear algebra chapters) the Fourier Transform is a linear map that takes an input function $f:\mathbb{R}\to\mathbb{R}$ and outputs the coefficients for a representation of $f$ with respect to a special basis of sine and cosine functions, called the Fourier basis.[^1] The Fourier transform has a whole host of properties that make it useful for science, but in brief, the input functions are often thought of as "signals," such as composite sound waves, and the output is thought of as constituent tonal frequencies. For example, automated phone systems ("For English, press one…") recognize the buttons you press using Fourier analysis. Each button corresponds to two overlapping pure frequencies, and the receiving end applies the Fourier transform to identify the frequencies, and hence which number was pressed. The Fast Fourier Transform, or FFT for short, is a particularly efficient algorithm for writing (finite approximations of) signals in the Fourier basis. It's fast because it takes advantage of the symmetries in sines and cosines. The discovery of this algorithm has been described as the beginning of the information age.

[^1]: This is nontrivial because the vector spaces involved are infinite dimensional.

FFT is a cornerstone of electrical engineering, but the technique is much deeper than simply interpreting electrical signals. For example, FFT can be used to multiply large integers much faster than the usual algorithm. Lev was well familiar with the FFT and its advanced applications. He was frustrated by students who didn't understand the basic FFT, and who didn't care that they didn't get it. It's boring to teach people who don't care. I can sympathize.

But then he excitedly explained a new insight! It was something he learned about the FFT while preparing his lecture notes. The details are irrelevant, but my advisor also attempted to explain this new insight to his students. This was probably not helpful for them. Instead of focusing on basic syntax and properties of the Fourier Transform, Lev tried to convey insights he had learned over his career. This would have been great for a graduate seminar, but unfortunately it was levels above his students ability to comprehend. They were still missing the foundational tools needed to express these thoughts. Lev was tapping the beat of a song that played clearly in his head, but which his students had never heard before.

Pedagogical critiques aside,[^2] after that conversation I synthesized what felt like an obvious truth in hindsight, about math, programming, and surely all endeavors worth pursuing. Understanding comes in levels of insight. And as you learn—but more importantly as you re-learn—you gain meta insights. Insights about insights. You learn what parts of a thing to appreciate and what parts are cruft.

[^2]: Collegiate education at research institutions is a snake's nest of competing incentives and demands on one's time. Having been on the academic job market and seen what constitutes success in research, I can understand the need to conduct teaching as Lev did even if I want the world to be better.

Most experienced programmers understand these levels well. You start with the basic syntax and semantics of a given programming language. You move up to the basic tenets of designing and maintaining software, such as how to extract and organize functions for reuse, proper testing and documentation, and the role of various protocols interfacing with your system. From there it grows to insights about a particular area of specialization, such as how the choice of database affects the performance of a web application, how to manage an ecosystem of interdependent services, or the tradeoffs between development speed, maintainability, and extensibility.

When you switch to a new language, syntactic scaffolding and new paradigms initially hide the core idea of a program. This can be complex type declarations, or the orthodoxy of a particular pattern (promises, streams, coroutines, etc.), which are foundationally important, but unrelated to the core logic of a program. Over time—and with experience, an improved mental model, and useful tooling—the cruft becomes invisible. You see a program for its core logic while still taking advantage of the features of the language.

In software, once an engineer is experienced in the lower levels of the hierarchy, for the most part they're not encouraged to relearn them. There are exceptions to this, for example, when one learns a new programming language or is submitted to code review by senior engineers with too much time on their hands. But usually one doesn't spend long revisiting programming basics when learning a fourth language, nor dive deep into the design of a database when deciding what to use for a new app. You learn SQL once, and don't revisit relational algebra unless absolutely necessary.

In mathematics, relearning one's field is routine. The prevalence of teaching in the research mathematician's profession has a large impact on this. Mathematicians spend an unusual amount of time learning and relearning the basics of their field because they prepare lectures for undergraduates, run seminars and reading groups, and induct clueless graduate students into the world of their research. It's an entrenched part of the culture.

Terry Tao summarizes it well in his essay,[^3] "There's more to mathematics than rigour and proofs."

[^3]: https://terrytao.wordpress.com/career-advice/

> The point of rigour is not to destroy all intuition; instead, it should be used to destroy bad intuition while clarifying and elevating good intuition. It is only with a combination of both rigorous formalism and good intuition that one can tackle complex mathematical problems; one needs the former to correctly deal with the fine details, and the latter to correctly deal with the big picture. Without one or the other, you will spend a lot of time blundering around in the dark (which can be instructive, but is highly inefficient). So once you are fully comfortable with rigorous mathematical thinking, you should revisit your intuitions on the subject and use your new thinking skills to test and refine these intuitions rather than discard them. One way to do this is to ask yourself dumb questions; another is to relearn your field.

This is a worthwhile endeavor for anyone who wants to understand mathematics more deeply than copying a formula from a book or paper. One aspect of this is that it's difficult to fully appreciate a definition or theorem the first time around. Veterans of college calculus will appreciate our discussion of the motivation for the "right" definition of a limit in Chapter 8, because typical calculus courses are more about the mechanics—the syntax and basic semantics—of limits and derivatives. A deep understanding of the elegance and necessity of the "supporting" definitions, and how they generalize to ideas all across mathematics, is nowhere to be found. To do so requires equal parts elementary proofs and sufficient time to discuss counterexamples, neither of which are present for college freshmen in computer science and engineering.

Another aspect is that mathematical definitions and theorems create a complex web of generalization, specialization, and adaptation too vast to keep in your head at once. As one traverses a career, and studies some topics in more detail, reevaluating the same ideas can produce new inspiration. While gnawing on a tough problem, returning to teach basic calculus and thinking about limits might spur you to frame the problem in the light of successively better approximations, providing a new avenue for progress. While many researchers may find this more grueling than it's worth—dealing with the added distractions of grading, course design, and cheating students—in theory it has benefits beyond the education of the pupils. My advisor's foray into Fourier Analysis is another example. He may not have found that insight were he not required to prepare a lecture on the topic.

Linear algebra, even the basic stuff, is a perfect example of the web of variation and generalization. One can take the idea of linear independence of vectors, and generalize it to the theory of *matroids*, which turns out is a cozy place to study greedy algorithms (Cf. Chapter 10, Exercise 10.19). In number theory, vector spaces drive the idea of *transcendental numbers*, those numbers like $e$ and $\pi$ which can't be represented as the root of a polynomial with rational coefficients. Since $\mathbb{R}$ is a vector space over $\mathbb{Q}$, one studies a *transcendence basis* of this vector space (cf. Chapter 2, Exercise 2.5). In fields like algebraic geometry or dynamical systems, a central tool is to take a complicated object and "linearize" it, via a transformation that, say, adds new variables and equations, so that techniques from linear algebra can be applied. The form and function of the applications shapes one's understanding of the basic theory.

Linear algebra has higher levels of abstraction as well. We spent time, and will continue to spend time, discussing how to cleverly choose a basis. But there is a whole other side of linear algebra that builds up the entire theory basis-free. As we discussed about the definition of the limit, the "right" definition of a concept shouldn't depend on arbitrary choices. But almost everything we've seen about linear algebra depends on the choice of a basis! Recreating linear algebra without a basis requires more complicated and nuanced definitions, but often results in more enlightening proofs that generalize well to harder problems. As the mathematician Emil Artin once said, "Proofs involving matrices can be shortened by 50% if one throws the matrices out." Though we don't have the bandwidth in this book to cover this perspective, it's a higher rung on the ladder.

One might expect a basis-free theory could completely eliminate messy matrix algebra. It could hardly be further from the truth. There is a famous quote of Irving Kaplansky, an influential 20th century mathematician who worked in abstract algebra (among other topics), discussing how he and his colleagues approach problems that use linear algebra.

> We share a philosophy about linear algebra: we think basis-free, we write basis-free, but when the chips are down we close the office door and compute with matrices like fury.

That humorous scene is a microcosm of mathematical attitudes toward the various levels of abstraction. When it comes down to it, mathematicians will pick the most effective tool for the job, despite any additional mess or a high-horse preference for elegance. Or, as my father-in-law likes to say, "Sometimes you gotta stick your hand in the toilet." Kaplansky understands the depth and limitations of "thinking basis-free," and part of the meta-insight is to know which situations call for which tools, and why. One nice feature of matrices (and most computationally-friendly representations) is you can let the syntax bear the weight of most of the cognition. Fluency with notation and mechanics lets you write a thing down (be certain it was correct when you wrote it) and forget about it until you need it again.

In that respect, "cumbersome" syntax is like the manuals, READMEs, and automated scripts that you write for yourself and refer to every time you forget how to configure your web server. Writing things down in a precise, computational syntax also has the benefit of isolating and clarifying the nuance and essential characteristics of difficult examples. It's much easier to focus on the bigger picture, to look at a mess and point to the interesting core—as one would with a large program—once one can freely create and manipulate the atomic units. It's the same reason I say (fully aware of the irony) that the primary goal of a calculus class is to master algebra.

You don't learn calculus until you do differential equations. And then you don't learn calculus until you study smooth manifolds. And then you don't learn calculus until you write programs that do calculus. And then you don't learn calculus until you teach calculus. You basically never learn calculus, and every time you use it in a new setting you get new insights about it. I learned calculus while writing this book! As you mature, those insights become more nuanced, and your continued appreciation for that nuance is what keeps mathematics fresh and enjoyable. This isn't a unique feature to mathematics (appreciation for nuance is as important over a long career in politics or tennis as it is in mathematics), but the layman's attitude toward mathematics is that of stark facts. In reality, theories evolve and take on new colors over time.

Learning and re-learning is continuous in mathematics. When you return to an old subject, you must repeat the useful mechanism I've been touting throughout this book: to write down characteristic examples that serve as your mental model for a general pattern. Keeping examples in mind—picturesque examples with enough detail that you can descend the ladder of abstraction to compute if necessary—is what fortifies an idea and fertilizes the orchard from which you can pick ripe analogies.

The final aspect is that relearning one's field allows one to revisit the proofs of the central theorems of that subject. The maturity afforded by not spending most of one's effort trying to understand the proof allows one to then *judge* the proof on its merits. It's like reading the code for a system you designed, long after you've implemented and maintained it. You have a much better understanding of the *real* requirements and failures of the system. Such considerations often result in alternative proofs, which generalize and adapt in new and novel ways. Or one can gain a deeper understanding of the benefits and limitations of a proof technique, and how they apply (or don't) to a problem in the back of one's head.

Back down to earth, this book is roughly a second or third level of insight. The first level would be functional fluency with symbol manipulation. Though it sounds like it's quite basic, most of college mathematics education for engineers does not tread far off this path. This includes even differential equations, statistics, and linear algebra, often considered the terminal math courses for future software engineers.

The second level is largely about proof. Can you logically prove that the symbolic manipulations in the first level are correct? It's a meta level of insight, but in another sense it's still a kind of basic fluency. For many undergraduate mathematics majors, becoming fluent in the language of proof is the central goal of their studies. This is why almost all advanced math courses are proof-based courses, and why we've spent so much time in this book proving and discussing methods for proof.

The next level of insight, usually which comes after being able to prove the basic facts about an object, are the insights about why the existence and prevalence of that object makes sense. This occurs often through proof, but also through a non-rigorous hodge-podge of examples, discussion, connections to other objects, and the consideration of alternatives by which one becomes accommodated with a thing.

Further tiers revolve around new research. Understanding what questions are interesting, sketching why a theorem should be true before a proof is found, generalizing families of proofs into a theory that makes all those proofs trivial. And all the while one traverses the ladder of abstraction as needed, sometimes diving into the muddy waters to crack a tough integral, other times honing in on the importance of one particular property of an object.

It sounds negligent to speak about math in such an imprecise manner, and mathematicians like to poke fun at themselves. John von Neumann (of computer architecture fame) once told a physicist colleague, "In mathematics you don't understand things. You just get used to them." How deliciously blasphemous! More seriously, my interpretation is that this quote continues, "…until you find that next level of insight." It's true, at least, in my experience, that one must gain sufficient comfort in mechanics before one can attempt proof, and one must gain some level of comfort with proof before the next-level insights about definitions can be appreciated.

It's not just professional mathematicians who experience this. This happens at every level of the hierarchy. My wife is a math professor at a community college, and despite having spent years of her undergraduate career doing proofs by induction, it was not until she taught it a few times that the deeper understanding of why it worked dawned on her. She had a similar experience re-learning algebraic topology for a qualifying exam, and I distinctly recall her gleeful yelp when she realized that she intimately understood what she was doing and why it worked. She shouted, "The proof is trivial!"

The cognitive scientist Douglas Hofstadter asserts that analogies are the core mechanism of human cognition. Part of his evidence is the wealth of analogies that surround us in language: the commonplace concept of an airport "hub" relies on analogies between the spokes of a bicycle wheel and notions of centrality in a network, each of which rely on lower-level analogies of position and motion. These ideas are paired with ideas about corporations, a brand, and not to mention the web of concepts around human conceptions of airplane flight. This is all summarized by the single word "hub."

The quote at the beginning of this interlude suggests that mathematics is no different. Mathematical cognition is also largely built on analogies. And just like humans understand the concepts of motion or a wheel long before we're able to understand the concept of an airport hub, we're able to understand the lower levels of mathematical abstraction (and must become comfortable with them) before we can draw the analogies necessary to make use of the more complex and nuanced abstractions. And then, much later, we can look back at the bicycle wheel, or the derivative, with a new appreciation for its purpose and use. Mathematical intuition in particular is the graduation from purely analytical and mechanical analysis to a visceral feeling of why a thing should behave the way it does.

No matter where you currently stand, there are insights to be found and analogies to draw. Don't underestimate their value, even if they lie among "simple" things that you think you should have mastered years ago.
