# Chapter 13 Rigor and Formality

> Mathematics as we practice it is much more formally complete and precise than other sciences, but it is much less formally complete and precise for its content than computer programs. The difference has to do not just with the amount of effort: the kind of effort is qualitatively different. In large computer programs, a tremendous proportion of effort must be spent on myriad compatibility issues: making sure that all definitions are consistent, developing good data structures that have useful but not cumbersome generality, deciding on the right generality for functions, etc. The proportion of energy spent on the working part of a large program, as distinguished from the bookkeeping part, is surprisingly small. Because of compatibility issues that almost inevitably escalate out of hand because the right definitions change as generality and functionality are added, computer programs usually need to be rewritten frequently, often from scratch.
>
> —William Thurston, “On Proof and Progress in Mathematics”

Programmers who brave mathematical topics often come away wondering why mathematics isn’t more like programming. We’ve discussed some of the issues surrounding this question already in this book, like why mathematicians tend to use brief variable names, and how conventions will differ from source to source. Beneath these relatively superficial concerns is a question about rigor.

Thurston’s observations above were as true in the mid 90’s as they are over twenty years later. Software is far more rigorous than mathematics, and most of the work in software is about interface and data compatibility—“bookkeeping,” as Thurston calls it. This is the kind of work required by the rigor of software. You need to care whether your strings are in ASCII or Unicode, that data is sanitized, that dependent systems are synchronized, because ignoring this will make everything fall apart.

I once took a course on compiler design. The lectures were taught in the architecture building on campus. One day, the architecture students were having a project fair in the building, marveling over their structures and designs. In a lightly mocking tone, my compilers professor observed that software architecture was much more impressive than building architecture. Their buildings wouldn’t fall over if they forgot a few nails or slightly changed the materials. But a few misplaced characters in software has caused destruction, financial disaster, and death.

My professor had a point. Regular mayhem is caused by software security lapses, with root causes often related to improper string validation or bad uses of memory copying. A single improperly set permission bit can cause troves of private data to become public. Financial insecurity is almost synonymous with digital currencies, one particularly relevant example being the 2016 hack of the “Decentralized Autonomous Organization,” a sort of hedge fund governed by an Ethereum contract that contained a bug allowing a hacker to withdraw the equivalent of 50 million USD before it was mitigated. The root cause was a bug in the contract allowing an infinite recursion. Multiple (unmanned) space probes, costing hundreds of millions of dollars each, have been destroyed shortly after launch due to coding errors. The Ariane 5 crashed in 1996 because of a bug with integer overflow. The Mariner 1 in 1962 because of a missing hyphen. Finally, in 1991, a bug in the Patriot missile defense system resulted in the death of 28 soldiers at a military base in Saudi Arabia. The bug was an inaccurate calculation of wall-clock time due to a poor choice of rounding. I have little doubt there will be additional deaths caused by lapses and insecurities in self-driving car software, in addition to the damage already caused by accidents (many of which went unreported, according to some 2018 journalism).

These sorts of bugs cause internal debacles at every company with alarming regularity. One consequence is a general feeling among many engineers that “all software is shit.” More optimistically, the best engineers work very hard to design interfaces and abstractions that, to the best of software’s ability, prevent mistakes. Those who design aircraft control systems do this quite well. Once you’ve made enough mistakes of your own, you learn a certain air of humility. No matter how smart, even the best engineers get tired, grumpy, overworked, or forgetful—each of which is liable to make them forget a hyphen. Good tools make forgetting the hyphen impossible.

In the subfield of computer science dealing with distributed systems, these issues are exacerbated by the extreme difficulty of even telling whether a system satisfies the guarantees you need it to. A titan of this area is mathematician turned computer scientist Leslie Lamport. Through his work, Lamport essentially defined distributed computing as a field of study. Many of the concepts you have heard of in this area—synchronized clocks, Paxos consensus, mutexes—were invented by Lamport.

Lamport has no particular love of mathematical discourse. In his 1994 essay, “How to Write a Proof,” he admits, “Mathematical notation has improved over the past few centuries,” but goes on to claim that the style of mathematical proof employed by most of mathematics (including in this book)—mixing prose and formulas in a web of propositions, lemmas, and theorems—is wholly inadequate.

Much of Lamport’s seminal work in the last few decades grew out of his frustration with errors in distributed systems papers. As he attests, some researcher would propose (say) a consensus algorithm. It might seem correct at first glance, but inevitably it would contain mistakes—if not be wrong outright. Lamport concludes that guarantees about the behavior of distributed systems are particularly hard to establish with the rigor that is needed for practical considerations. If you’re going to design a new distributed database, you want a much stronger assurance than the assent of some overworked journal referees. Lamport writes,

> *These proofs are seldom deep, but usually have considerable detail. Structured proofs provided a way of coping with this detail. The style was first applied to proofs of ordinary theorems in a paper I wrote with Martín Abadi. He had already written conventional proofs—proofs that were good enough to convince us and, presumably, the referees. Rewriting the proofs in a structured style, we discovered that almost every one had serious mistakes, though the theorems were correct. Any hope that incorrect proofs might not lead to incorrect theorems was destroyed in our next collaboration. Time and again, we would make a conjecture and write a proof sketch on the blackboard—a sketch that could easily have been turned into a convincing conventional proof—only to discover, by trying to write a structured proof, that the conjecture was false. Since then, I have never believed a result without a careful, structured proof. My skepticism has helped avoid numerous errors.*

This is coming from a Turing Award winner, a man considered a luminary of computer science. Even the smartest theorem provers among us make ample mistakes.

Consequently, Lamport designed a proof assistant called TLA+, which he has used to check the correctness of various claims about distributed systems. TLA+ is supposed to prevent you from shooting your own mathematical foot. TLA+ falls in step with a body of work related to automated proof systems. Some systems you may have heard include Coq and Isabelle. Some of these systems claim the ability to prove your theorems for you, but I’ll instead focus just on the correctness checking aspects.

So computer scientists like Lamport and software engineers are perturbed by the lack of rigor in mathematics. Each remembers the fresh wounds of catastrophes due to avoidable mistakes. Meanwhile, Lamport and others provide systems like TLA+ that would allow mathematician to achieve much higher certainty in their own results. This raises the question, why don’t all mathematicians use automated proof assistants like TLA+? This is a detailed and complex question. I will not be able to answer it justly, but I can provide some perspective.

We have argued that the elegance of a proof is important. Mathematicians work hard to be able to summarize the core idea of a proof in a few words or a representative picture. Full rigor as the standard for all proofs would arguably strip many proofs of their elegance, increasing the burden of transmitting intuition and insight between humans. The work you put into making an argument automatable is work you could have spent on making math accessible to humans (via additional papers, talks, and working with students). These extra activities already serve as correctness checks, so is there significant added benefit to a formal specification? Lamport’s counter is that making it accessible to humans is counterproductive when the result is incorrect. He would also argue that a structured proof *is* easier to understand. One underlying issue Lamport’s riposte ignores is that mathematics is a social activity, and formal proof specifications are decidedly antisocial. Good for those who want to ensure planes don’t crash, bad for those who want to do mathematics.

Another aspect concerns the priorities and preferences of the subcultures of mathematics. Theory builders might argue that if your proof is too complicated to keep track of—which is why you would want TLA+—it’s because your theory has not been built well enough to make the proof trivial. Conversely, problem solvers might complain that proof assistants limit their ability to employ clever constructions. Being able to invoke a result from a disconnected area of math requires you to re-implement that entire field in your new context. Dependency management would turn few-page arguments into thousand-line software libraries.

Both of these attitudes reconverge on Thurston’s observation, that the kind of effort that goes into math is categorically different from software. Mathematicians don’t *want* to nitpick type errors and missing parentheses. They want to think about ideas at a higher level. Mathematicians have built up so many abstractions over the years specifically to avoid the mundane details that can muddle an idea. One explanation for why TLA+ work so well for distributed systems theorems is that those theorems have relatively few layers of indirection. A handful of bits might represent consensus. On the other hand, in geometry you might think the thought, “this space is very flat, and that should have such-and-such effect.” An automated proof assistant will be of no use there, nor will it help you refine the degree to which your hypothesized effect is present. You must lay everything out perfectly formally, even if your definitions haven’t been finalized. Then too often you resort to writing and rewriting, and before long you’ve stopped doing math entirely. If you believe Michael Atiyah that the proof is the very last step of mathematical inquiry, a proof assistant is useless for the majority of your work.

As most engineers can understand, the degree of rigor to require is a tradeoff with tangible benefits on both sides. Mathematicians opt to let some errors slip through. Over time these errors will eventually be found and reverted or fixed. Since technology rarely goes straight from mathematical publication to space probe control software, the world has enough slack to accommodate it.

Thurston also questions the two assumptions underlying this discussion:

1. *that there is uniform, objective and firmly established theory and practice of mathematical proof, and*
2. *that progress made by mathematicians consists of proving theorems.*

Thurston instead prefers a question more leading to what he feels is the correct answer: “How do mathematicians advance human understanding of mathematics?” Many mathematicians feel unsatisfied by computer-aided proofs because they don’t help them *personally* understand the proof. If the core insight can’t fit in a single human’s head, it might as well be unproved. This is still the attitude of many toward the famous four-color theorem, the shortest proof of which to date involves much brute force case checking by computer. As much as rigor helps one establish correctness, it does not guarantee synthesis and understanding.

Thurston continues,

> I think that mathematics is one of the most intellectually gratifying of human activities. Because we have a high standard for clear and convincing thinking and because we place a high value on listening to and trying to understand each other, we don’t engage in interminable arguments and endless redoing of our mathematics. We are prepared to be convinced by others. Intellectually, mathematics moves very quickly. Entire mathematical landscapes change and change again in amazing ways during a single career. When one considers how hard it is to write a computer program even approaching the intellectual scope of a good mathematical paper, and how much greater time and effort have to be put into it to make it “almost” formally correct, it is preposterous to claim that mathematics as we practice it is anywhere near formally correct.

Rather, Thurston claims that reliability of mathematical ideas “does not primarily come from mathematicians formally checking formal arguments; it comes from mathematicians thinking carefully and critically about mathematical ideas.”
